---
layout: post
title: Lab 06 Emulate A Raspberry Pi
date: 2023-09-01 00:00:00
---
<!-- more -->
##### This lab is mainly from the [QEMU Web](https://www.qemu.org/) and [Azeria Labs](https://azeria-labs.com/emulate-raspberry-pi-with-qemu/)

QEMU is a generic emulator and it emulates many machines. Most of the options are similar for all machines. 

QEMU can emulate both 32-bit and 64-bit Arm CPUs. Use the `qemu-system-aarch64` executable to simulate a 64-bit Arm machine. You can use either `qemu-system-arm` or` qemu-system-aarch64` to simulate a 32-bit Arm machine: in general, command lines that work for `qemu-system-arm` will behave the same when used with `qemu-system-aarch64`.

QEMU has generally good support for Arm guests. It has support for nearly fifty different machines. The reason it support so many is that Arm hardware is much more widely varying than x86 hardware. Arm CPUs are generally built into “system-on-chip” (SoC) designs created by many different companies with different devices, and these SoCs are then built into machines which can vary still further even if they use the same SoC. Even with fifty boards QEMU does not cover more than a small fraction of the Arm hardware ecosystem.

For QEMU’s Arm system emulation, you must specify which board model you want to use with the `-M` or `--machine` option; there is no default.

Because Arm systems differ so much and in fundamental ways, typically operating system or firmware images intended to run on one machine will not run at all on any other. This is often surprising for new users who are used to the x86 world where every system looks like a standard PC. (Once the kernel has booted, most userspace software cares much less about the detail of the hardware.)

If you already have a system image or a kernel that works on hardware and you want to boot with QEMU, check whether QEMU lists that machine in its `-machine help` output. If it is listed, then you can probably use that board model. If it is not listed, then unfortunately your image will almost certainly not boot on QEMU. (You might be able to extract the filesystem and use that with a different kernel which boots on a system that QEMU does emulate.)

If you don’t care about reproducing the idiosyncrasies of a particular bit of hardware, such as small amount of RAM, no PCI or other hard disk, etc., and just want to run Linux, the best option is to use the `virt` board. This is a platform which doesn’t correspond to any real hardware and is designed for use in virtual machines. You’ll need to compile Linux with a suitable configuration for running on the `virt` board. `virt` supports PCI, virtio, recent CPUs and large amounts of RAM. It also supports 64-bit CPUs.

In this lab, we will emulate the Raspberry Pi, a famous single-board computer for general computing and embedded systems. QEMU provides models of the following Raspberry Pi boards:

`raspi0` and `raspi1ap`

ARM1176JZF-S core, 512 MiB of RAM

`raspi2b`

Cortex-A7 (4 cores), 1 GiB of RAM

`raspi3ap`

Cortex-A53 (4 cores), 512 MiB of RAM

`raspi3b`

Cortex-A53 (4 cores), 1 GiB of RAM

#### Implemented devices 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

> *   ARM1176JZF-S, Cortex-A7 or Cortex-A53 CPU
>     
> *   Interrupt controller
>     
> *   DMA controller
>     
> *   Clock and reset controller (CPRMAN)
>     
> *   System Timer
>     
> *   GPIO controller
>     
> *   Serial ports (BCM2835 AUX - 16550 based - and PL011)
>     
> *   Random Number Generator (RNG)
>     
> *   Frame Buffer
>     
> *   USB host (USBH)
>     
> *   GPIO controller
>     
> *   SD/MMC host controller
>     
> *   SoC thermal sensor
>     
> *   USB2 host controller (DWC2 and MPHI)
>     
> *   MailBox controller (MBOX)
>     
> *   VideoCore firmware (property)
>     

#### Missing devices
----------------------------------------------------------------

> *   Peripheral SPI controller (SPI)
>     
> *   Analog to Digital Converter (ADC)
>     
> *   Pulse Width Modulation (PWM)


Task: 
-----------

Emulate the Raspberry Pi using QEMU on your own computer. Write a "Hello world" program using C code and compile it with [GCC](https://gcc.gnu.org/). Execute the program and check the result on the console.  

The version of the RaspPi board is not specified. Here are some tips for the lab:

1. Install latest QEMU on your machine. For Mac users, try `brew install qemu` or `sudo port install qemu` according to your system-installed package manager (*Homebrew* or *Macport*). For Windows users, get the installer from [32bit](https://qemu.weilnetz.de/w32/) and [64bit](https://qemu.weilnetz.de/w64/).
    - For other conditions, try to run a Virtual Machine on your computer with [Ubuntu operating system](https://www.ubuntu.com/download/desktop). In the Ubuntu system, try `sudo apt-get install qemu-system` to install the QEMU.  
2. For the QEMU emulation you will need the following:

   - A Raspbian Image. For example, [https://downloads.raspberrypi.com/raspios_armhf/images/raspios_armhf-2020-05-28/](https://downloads.raspberrypi.com/raspios_armhf/images/raspios_armhf-2020-05-28/) (other versions might work as well)
   - Corresponding qemu kernel for the image: [https://github.com/dhruvvyas90/qemu-rpi-kernel](https://github.com/dhruvvyas90/qemu-rpi-kernel). For example, `kernel-qemu-4.19.50-buster` for the Raspbian Buster. Also, don't forget the device tree file: `versatile-pb-buster.dtb`.
3. Extract the image to obtain the `.img` file, and place it in the same directory as kernel file and `.dtb` file. Then write a script to easily start qemu in the future. For example, for Windows users, the `.bat` script content is like follows:

```batch
qemu-system-arm.exe -M versatilepb -cpu arm1176 -m 256 ^
-drive format=raw,file=2020-05-27-raspios-buster-armhf.img ^
-net nic  -net user,hostfwd=tcp::5022-:22 ^
-dtb versatile-pb-buster.dtb ^
-kernel kernel-qemu-4.19.50-buster ^
-append  "root=/dev/sda2 panic=1 rootfstype=ext4 rw" ^
-serial stdio ^
-usb 
pause
```

For Mac users, the `shell` script content is like follows:

```bash
qemu-system-arm -M versatilepb -cpu arm1176 -m 256 \
-hda 2020-05-27-raspios-buster-armhf.img \
-net nic,model=virtio  -net user,hostfwd=tcp::5022-:22 \
-dtb versatile-pb-buster.dtb \
-kernel kernel-qemu-4.19.50-buster \
-append  "root=/dev/sda2 panic=1 rootfstype=ext4 rw" \
-no-reboot -netdev user,id=unet\
-device virtio-net-pci,netdev=unet \
```

The options can be found in the documents of QEMU. Also, the details of the script can be found in [https://github.com/dhruvvyas90/qemu-rpi-kernel](https://github.com/dhruvvyas90/qemu-rpi-kernel). Now you might have a graphic interface for the Raspbian operating system. If not, try to login to the system using `ssh pi@127.0.0.1 -p 5022` on your own machine (the one from which you launched the qemu).

Zip your answers (screenshots and descriptions) file into a file named _yourID\_l06.zip_. Upload this zip file to the Chaoxing Space.

* * *